A KEP for StartupPolicy (#244)
kubernetes-sigs/jobset: keps/104-StartupPolicy/README.md

documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

## Motivation

High Performance Computing / Machine Learning users usually want some control over how jobs are being created.  A Startup policy would allow a user to specify which status a replicated job should have before starting other replicated jobs in a JobSet.

### Goals

- Add a startup policy for JobSet

### Non-Goals

> - Complicated workflow specifications

Author: updated.

  - This means that we will support simple dependecies rather than processing a full DAG.
  - Projects like argo-workflows are a better use case for this.

> - Starting Jobs based on Ready will be at the ReplicatedJob level not at the Job level.

Author: I didn't do a good job of explaining that.  

I meant to say that we don't support a percentage of jobs to be ready (ie 80% of the jobs are ready so the overall ReplicatedJob is ready).

> - Starting Jobs based on Ready will be at the ReplicatedJob level not at the Job level.

Author: I cleared this up to say we want support partial ready in a ReplicatedJob.

The API below would fit my purpose.

```yaml
apiVersion: jobset.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: JobSet
metadata:
  name: driver-ready-worker-start
spec:
  startupPolicy:
     replicatedJobsStartInOrder: true
  replicatedJobs:
  - name: driver
    replicas: 1
    template:
      spec:
        # Set backoff limit to 0 so job will immediately fail if any pod fails.
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 1
        parallelism: 1
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: driver
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10000
  - name: workers
    replicas: 1
    template:
      spec:
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 2
        parallelism: 2
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: worker
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
```

#### Story 2

As a user, I want my replicated jobs to start in order.

> One area that this could be useful is if someone has a messagequeue replicatedJob, followed by a driver replicatedJob, followed by a worker replicated job.

Author: Fixed.

> In this case, I want messagequeue to start, then the driver, and then finally the worker.  

Author: Fixed.

const (
 // This is the default setting
 // AnyOrder means that we will start jobs without any specific order.
 AnyOrder StartupPolicyOrderOptions = "AnyOrder"
 // InOrder starts the jobs in order that they are listed.
 InOrder StartupPolicyOrderOptions = "InOrder"
)

type StartupPolicy struct {
 // StartupPolicyOrder is an enum of different options for StartupPolicy
 // AnyOrder means to start replicated jobs in any order.
 // InOrder means to start them as they are listed in the JobSet.
 // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=AnyOrder;InOrder
 StartupPolicyOrder StartupPolicyOrderOptions `json:"startupPolicyOrder"`
}
```

### Implementation

We have three cases where startupPolicy applies:

- when the jobset is first created
- when the jobset is restarted after a failure (with restart or recreate all failure policy)
- when the jobset is resumed after suspension

In cases 1 and 2, the operator controls the order of creating the jobs, and so it creates the replicatedJob only when its turn comes in the startup sequence.
In case 3, the operator controls the order of unsuspending the jobs, and so it unsuspends the replicatedJob only when its turn comes in the startup sequence.

> We use the annotation `jobset.sigs.k8s.io/replicated-job-to-start` to track which replicatedJob is next to create or unsuspend.

Reviewer: Why do you need this?
In which object is it stored?
How/when is it updated?

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset/pull/244#discussion_r1424422189

Reviewer: The answers to these questions should be in the KEP.

Author: Thanks for pointing that out. I added a little mention of this.

> We use the annotation `jobset.sigs.k8s.io/replicated-job-to-start` to track which replicatedJob is next to create or unsuspend.

Author: updated.

### Defaulting/Validation

- StartupPolicy is immutable.

> - StartupPolicyOrder of `Any` is default setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- StartupPolicyOrder of `AnyOrder` is default setting.
```

Author: Updated.

existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

#### Unit Tests

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `controller`: `Aug 7th 2023` - `31.6%`

Unit tests are low in this area as we do more of our testing at the integration level.

We will add a new file called startup_policy to apply our actions.

> #### Integration tests

Reviewer: Worth testing suspending a JobSet when it hasn't finished starting up.

Author: Good call. Added

            - name: driver
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
  - name: worker
    replicas: 2
    template:
      spec:
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 2
        parallelism: 2
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: worker
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
```

### Risks and Mitigations

To avoid the JobSet become a half-baked workflow manager, we will not allow for starting particular replicated jobs.
<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

### API Proposal
  
This is an annotation added to a JobSet when `InOrder` is used.
It will track the next ReplicatedJob that is to be started/resumed.

```golang
const (

>  ReplicatedJobStart string = "jobset.sigs.k8s.io/startup-policy-next-to-start"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 StartupPolicyNextToStart string = "jobset.sigs.k8s.io/startup-policy-next-to-start"
```

)

> type StartupPolicyOrderOptions string

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
type StartupPolicyOptions string
```

const (
 // This is the default setting
 // AnyOrder means that we will start jobs without any specific order.
 AnyOrder StartupPolicyOrderOptions = "AnyOrder"

>  // InOrder starts the jobs in order that they are listed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 // InOrder starts the ReplicatedJobs in order that they are listed. Jobs within a ReplicatedJob will 
 // still start in any order.
```

 InOrder StartupPolicyOrderOptions = "InOrder"
)

type StartupPolicy struct {
 // StartupPolicyOrder is an enum of different options for StartupPolicy
 // AnyOrder means to start replicated jobs in any order.
 // InOrder means to start them as they are listed in the JobSet.
 // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=AnyOrder;InOrder
 StartupPolicyOrder StartupPolicyOrderOptions `json:"startupPolicyOrder"`
}
```

### Implementation

We have three cases where startupPolicy applies:

- when the jobset is first created
- when the jobset is restarted after a failure (with restart or recreate all failure policy)
- when the jobset is resumed after suspension

In cases 1 and 2, the operator controls the order of creating the jobs, and so it creates the replicatedJob only when its turn comes in the startup sequence.
In case 3, the operator controls the order of unsuspending the jobs, and so it unsuspends the replicatedJob only when its turn comes in the startup sequence.

Since each start/resume of a replicated job will trigger a reconcile, we have to track which replicated job is to start/resume.

> The annotation `jobset.sigs.k8s.io/startup-policy-next-to-start` will be updated on each reconcile to reflect what is the next ReplicatedJob to resume.

Reviewer 2: Can you explain how this field will be set to prevent race conditions if the JobSet was suspended or a restart triggered mid way through a startup?

Thinking more about this, I think this is probably better be a condition on JobSet, which serves as a way to communicate startup progress.

Author: If its a condition, are you thinking that the reason field could reflect which replicated jobset we are waiting on?

Reviewer 2: Yes.

Author: updated this.

> It is implied that the previous all of the jobs of the previous replicated job must be ready before this replicated job is started.

Reviewer 2: not sure what you mean by implied, but this is something the controller need to explicitly check: start the next replicatedJob only when the previous one is ready.

Author: yes, the controller will check that. I said implied because we don't have any API or condition that says which job is starting (and we are implicitly waiting for all the jobs to be ready). So its implied in the sense that there is no explict API stating that we are waiting on this job.

The controller should look at the previous job and verify that it is all ready before it starts the next one.

Reviewer: Why not just look at the statuses of all the Jobs in each reconcile? Caching the "next step" is probably going to lead to race conditions.

One corner case to consider is if a Job immediate terminates successfully. What would be the semantics in that case?

Author: In this case, the main problem is what replicated job do you want to start next? If replicated job a is all ready, then we should go to b. But looking at the status of all jobs means you may see that both b and c are not yet started but you aren't tracking which one is next to be started.

In the case of job terminate successfully wouldn't that be considered successful eventually in the status field of the jobset?

Reviewer 3: > In this case, the main problem is what replicated job do you want to start next? If replicated job a is all ready, then we should go to b. But looking at the status of all jobs means you may see that both b and c are not yet started but you aren't tracking which one is next to be started.

Shouldn't the order determined by the order of the replicatedJobs in the spec?

Author: Yes, maybe we don't need the annotation after all. I think we have ready, suspended, failed and succeeded as status for ReplicatedJobs.

I think the main issue is on creation or restart, I am thinking you want to track which jobs were created/recreated in case that they are still waiting to be ready.

What I have to do is on `createJobs` I want to only create the jobs in order specified in the startup policy. But it make take a few reconciles for those jobs to start but I think we could look at the status to determine that.

@ahg-g wdyt?

Reviewer: why is restart different? You should just iterate through all the jobs and see if they are running or not.

> In the case of job terminate successfully wouldn't that be considered successful eventually in the status field of the jobset?

That's a question for your design that should ultimately be reflected in the documentation. It's not necessarily obvious what the semantics are.

Reviewer: Also what if the job has a TTLAfterFinished?

Reviewer 2: Yes, we don't need to rely on an explicit state to track what to start next. But I think it is good UX to have a condition indicating that the JobSet is starting up `InOrder` and indicate the progress (as you mentioned, the reason perhaps indicates which replicatedJob we started last or will start next).

I am not sure I follow the question on job termination, if the job terminates, then we are done, why is this relevant to startup sequence? In the same vein, why is TTLAfterFinished relevant as well?

Author: IMO its not related to startup policy but its a fair point if we use `replicatedJobStatus` to track state. Since that relies on the Jobs being present in the apiserver, what happens if those jobs are removed from etcd?

If `ttlAfterFinished` is set to a low value (or a job finishes and is deleted quickly), then replicatedJobStatus will no longer detect the status of those replicated jobs. I could see a similar issue happening if `successPolicy` or `failurePolicy` is used. 

Now this seems to be an edge case because the answer I think of is don't set your `ttlAfterFinished` to a time that is less than a reconcile period..

Reviewer 2: We need to have finalizers on the child jobs to make sure that their status is synced on the replicatedJob status before they get deleted. 

So I agree that we need to take a dependency on the replicatedJob status when determining if the jobs under a replicated job are ready or not. We can address the correctness of status in the face of deleted job objects using finalizers as a followup.

Author: I think this  belongs outside of StartupPolicy so I created https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset/issues/360 to document this.

Reviewer 2: Yes, but there is still <<Unresolved>> tag in the text.

There are a bunch of suggestions as well that were not addressed yet.

Author: I address those and updated this.

  - [Allow for both ready and succeeded](#allow-for-both-ready-and-succeeded)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This KEP adds a StartupPolicy for Jobsets.  A StartupPolicy allows for some flexibility on when to start ReplicatedJobs in a Jobset.  
<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

## Motivation

> High Performance Computing / Machine Learning users usually want some control over how jobs are being created.  A Startup policy would allow a user to specify which status a replicated job should have before starting other replicated jobs in a jobset.

Reviewer 4: Maybe we could provide an example here, like:

> which status (e.g., ....) a replicated job should have

### Goals

- Add a startup policy for JobSet

### Non-Goals

- Complicated workflow specifications

>   - This means that we will support simple dependecies rather than processing a full dag.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - This means that we will support simple dependecies rather than processing a full DAG.
```
And maybe we could better clarify this - one level of dependencies? One level of flat start up order logic? I don't think we want to imply that we are even processing a DAG here to keep the idea of a workflow entirely separate. This is just a startup policy, no DAG or workflow relevancy. It's for a step in a workload. https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/ (I assume JobSet would eventually be added there).

  - Projects like argo-workflows are a better use case for this.
- Starting Jobs based on Ready will be at the ReplicatedJob level not at the Job level.
  - ReplicatedJobs will be classified as ready if all jobs are ready.

## Proposal

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

As a user, I have one ReplicatedJob that functions as the driver and a series of worker ReplicatedJobs.  
I want the driver to be ready before I start the worker replicated jobs.  
This is useful for HPC/AI/ML workloads as some frameworks have a driver pod that must be ready before the workers are started.  

The API below would fit my purpose.

```yaml
apiVersion: jobset.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: JobSet
metadata:
  name: driver-ready-worker-start
spec:
  startupPolicy:
     replicatedJobsStartInOrder: true
  replicatedJobs:
  - name: driver
    replicas: 1

>     template:

Reviewer 4: stupid question - this is just a Job specification right used as the template? https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset/blob/4222b34572b8cd8b8a1a7863c9fde5098bd370a3/api/jobset/v1alpha2/jobset_types.go#L136 

So why can't we put the readiness logic in there instead?

Author: I don't really understand what you are asking.  Technically the readiness logic would go there but in the pod template of the JobTemplate (turtles all the way down).  

Are you thinking more that there should be a JobReadiness field?

Reviewer 4: I'm generally thinking how we can simplify the design to put some of the logic into Job, and kill two birds with one stone. It's fairly abstract thinking at the moment and I didn't do a good job of articulating myself (and probably need to think more on this before it's ready for that).

      spec:
        # Set backoff limit to 0 so job will immediately fail if any pod fails.
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 1
        parallelism: 1
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: driver
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10000
  - name: workers
    replicas: 1
    template:
      spec:
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 2
        parallelism: 2
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: worker
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
```

#### Story 2

As a user, I want my replicated jobs to start in order.

> One area that this could be useful is if someone has a redis replicatedJob, followed by a driver replicatedJob, followed by a worker replicated job.

Reviewer 2: Do people use Job to deploy redis?

Author: @vsoch has pointed out to me workflows like https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9561187?casa_token=aoAoa11fcfoAAAAA:jGlCi6-v5KObaSSlOJooCFCtlpSAQJJkEV8zrVOCTDJfBcf2WihKaDLNTgnd_PqwWQPdQA0 that may require a database/service be deployed as part of a batch job. Maybe a MessageQueue is more likely but there are some examples in the wild.

You are correct that most likely someone should use a Deployment for Redis but I have heard of people wanting batch jobs that utilize some kind of database in the lifecycle of their job and have it complete once the other tasks are complete.

Reviewer 4: That is correct. What distinguishes these services is that they are only needed for the scoped run of the job - it's a strategy for worker communication that can be cleaned up with them.

Author: I updated the user story to say its a message queue rather than redis.

  - name: redis
    replicas: 1
    template:
      spec:
        # Set backoff limit to 0 so job will immediately fail if any pod fails.
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 1
        parallelism: 1
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: driver
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 100
  - name: driver
    replicas: 2
    template:
      spec:
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 2
        parallelism: 2
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: driver
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
  - name: worker
    replicas: 2
    template:
      spec:
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 2
        parallelism: 2
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: worker
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
```

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

> In the JobSet API, ReplicatedJobs are the individual Job elements that are created.  These are Replicated so you can have the same Job replicated.  This adds some complexity in the concept of Ready as we must consider the overall ReplicatedJob Ready rather than using the individual Jobs.

Reviewer 4: Nit: in this document I see each of Jobset and JobSet. I think the latter is correct (what I use) so maybe we should be consistent.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

### API Proposal

Keeping the non specified jobs halted we propose to use suspend for these jobs.

So we will add a new field to the ReplicatedJobStatus.

```golang
// ReplicatedJobStatus defines the observed ReplicatedJobs Readiness.
type ReplicatedJobStatus struct {
  ...
	Suspended int32  `json:"suspended"`
}
```

```golang
// Status of ReplicatedJob for StartupPolicy
type Status string

const (
 // Ready means that the job is ready
 Ready Status = "Ready"

 +// Suspended means that the job is suspended
 +Suspended Status = "Suspended"
)

type StartupPolicy struct {
  // If this field is set to true, we will start all replicatedJobs in order.
	// Started means that all the Jobs of a ReplicatedJob are ready.
	// +optional

> 	ReplicatedJobsStartInOrder *bool `json:"replicatedJobsStartInOrder,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: I think we better use an enum here instead to allow to expand into future startup policies.

Author: What kind of other startup policies would we support with just an enum? Reverse startup or forward startup?.

It seems that if we want to expand we should have a usecase in mind that can define what they want?

Reviewer 2: It could be: start the leader first and then the rest in any order (rather than all in strict order). Boolean locks us in two choices, enum offers more future possibilities at pretty much no impact to the API.

The two enum values for now would be `Any` and `InOrder`, with `Any` being the default.

Author: I updated the KEP to reflect this. 

I used `AnyOrder` and `InOrder` as `Any` was used for SuccessPolicy.

}
```

### Implementation

> If StartupPolicy is set and suspend field is off, we will start all jobs in a suspended state.

Reviewer 2: How does the implementation interact with failure policy?

Author: As it would normally. We would test failure policy first and if the JobSet failed, then the job is marked as failed.

Author: I updated this.

I was thinking in every reconcile, we check `successPolicy`, `failurePolicy` and then `StartupPolicy`. If a Job failed, then we will would mark the JobSet as failed before continuing on to the other jobs.

We will not set a condition for JobSet as suspended so we can distinguish between a suspended JobSet and a JobSet with startup policy.

> To track which ReplicatedJobs are suspended, we will add a `Suspended` field to the ReplicatedJobStatus.  

Reviewer 2: This will be confusing, can we use a different name? `WaitingToStart` or something along those lines. Also, when are you going to set this value? it needs to exist from creation time, so I think we need to do it in the defaulting webhook, but I am not sure if status can be set there.

Author: I was thinking it would be nice to have a status field for suspended jobs anyway. I halt the execution of the jobs using suspend so it made sense to title this suspended. I can mark it as `WaitingToStart`. The main issue is what do you want for jobs that are all suspended due to the `suspend` field being set?

I have a PR up for this https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset/pull/250. This mainly adds a new field for JobSet to allow for one to know how many ReplicatedJobs are suspended. And I was able to use this for the implementation PR.

Author: I have an implementation of this https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset/pull/246 if you allow for setting suspend when creating the jobs

Reviewer 2: > I was thinking it would be nice to have a status field for suspended jobs anyway.

ok, we can add that, but suspend and startup sequence are two different concepts and I think it is a mistake to conflate them.

It seems that what we need here is a status to track which replicatedJob we started last to kickoff the next one. This should be separate from the concept of "suspend". We could use a single status field indicating the name of the replicatedJob we processed last.

Author: Do you think that this could just be a label? I don't see why it should be a status field if its an internal implementation detail.

Reviewer 2: An annotation would be appropriate.

Author: I really don't know how we could use annotations to achieve this. The reason I went with Suspend is that there is really no other way in kube to halt the execution of a job once it is created. We have to define the jobs and create them at some point. So I think that starting these jobs in a suspended state is probably the only way to do this with what we have currently.

There is the job readiness gates that @alculquicondor is proposing that could be used here if we don't want to use suspend. But the problem is the same.

We want to create all the jobs in a JobSet and then start them in order. We can't really run the jobs in an order due to the async nature of controllers. It also would make applying failure-policy or success-policy difficult..

Reviewer 2: We have three cases where we startupPolicy applies:

1) when the jobset is first created
2) when the jobset is restarted after a failure (with restart or recreate all failure policy)
3) when the jobset is resumed after suspension

In cases 1 and 2, the operator controls the order of creating the jobs, and so it creates the replicatedJob only when its turn comes in the startup sequence. In case 3, the operator controls the order of unsuspending the jobs, and so it unsuspends the replicatedJob only when its turn comes in the startup sequence.

We use the annotation to track which replicatedJob is next to create or unsuspend.

Author: Thanks for clearing that up. I updated the design to call this out explictly.

> This field will track the number of replicas that are suspended.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This field will track ReplicatedJobs that are yet to start.
```

Author: Updated.

> If `ReplicatedJobsStartInOrder` is set, then we will start
> We will loop over all `ReplicatedJobStatuses`.
> We will unsuspend if the ReplicatedJob is suspended and we will trigger a reconcile.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If `ReplicatedJobsStartInOrder` is set, then we will loop over all `ReplicatedJobStatuses`.
We will start the ReplicatedJob if it is the next in order and trigger a reconcile.
```

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't we get a reconcile anyway triggered by the previous replicatedjob updates?

Author: In the startup policy function, I was thinking that if a ReplicatedJob is unsuspended, we will update but we should also return and trigger the reconcile. We don't want to unsuspend the other jobs in the list.

> Once all the replicatedJob are unsuspended we go onto to next replicated job in the list.

Reviewer 2: when will we start the next replicatedJob? until the previous replicatedjob is "ready"?

Author: Yes. I updated this to make it clearer.

> If policy is unsuccessful we will return and trigger a reconcile.  If the startup policy for that ReplicatedJob passes then we go onto the next one in the list.

Reviewer 2: what does it mean that the policy is unsuccessful?

Author: Left over from previous changes. In this case, it would wait for all the ReplicatedJobs to be ready. And if it fails, then it will be a no-op and on another trigger of the reconcile we will check again.

Author: Updated.

  - name: messagequeue
    replicas: 1
    template:
      spec:
        # Set backoff limit to 0 so job will immediately fail if any pod fails.
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 1
        parallelism: 1
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: messagequeue
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 100
  - name: driver
    replicas: 2
    template:
      spec:
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 2
        parallelism: 2
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: driver
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
  - name: worker
    replicas: 2
    template:
      spec:
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 2
        parallelism: 2
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: worker
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
```

### Risks and Mitigations

> To avoid the JobSet become a half-baked workflow manager, we will not allow for starting particular replicated jobs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To avoid the JobSet become a half-baked workflow manager, the API will not allow describing DAGs. The goal is to focus on supporting startup sequence that HPC and ML training jobs typically require.
```

Author: updated.

In case 3, the operator controls the order of unsuspending the jobs, and so it unsuspends the replicatedJob only when its turn comes in the startup sequence.

On initial creation or recreation, we will apply the startup policy before creating the jobs in a replicated job.
We will retrieve the `ReplicatedJobStatus` before each call to `createJobs` to verify which jobs have been created.

JobSet views the jobs that it owns and updates the `ReplicatedJobStatus` on each reconcile. For suspended jobs, we will view the `ReplicatedJobStatus` and resume the jobs as they are listed in the `startupPolicyOrder`.
Suspended is also tracked by `ReplicatedJobStatus`.

One area of contention is if Jobs finish fast and are deleted (ie `ttlAfterFinished` is short). 
We created [issue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset/issues/360) to address this.

### Defaulting/Validation

- StartupPolicy is immutable.
- StartupPolicyOrder of `AnyOrder` is default setting.

### User Experience

If Jobs are taking a long time to go to ready, we should have a clear way to check that the JobSet is behaving as expected.

We will add a condition for StartupPolicy to achieve this.

```golang
metav1.Condition{

>    Type:    "JobSetStartupPolicyComplete",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Type:    "JobSetStartupPolicyCompleted",
```

Author: updated.

const (
 // This is the default setting
 // AnyOrder means that we will start jobs without any specific order.
 AnyOrder StartupPolicyOptions = "AnyOrder"
 // InOrder starts the jobs in order that they are listed.
 InOrder StartupPolicyOptions = "InOrder"
)

type StartupPolicy struct {
 // StartupPolicyOrder is an enum of different options for StartupPolicy
 // AnyOrder means to start replicated jobs in any order.
 // InOrder means to start them as they are listed in the JobSet.
 // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=AnyOrder;InOrder
 StartupPolicyOrder StartupPolicyOptions `json:"startupPolicyOrder"`
}
```

### Implementation

We have three cases where startupPolicy applies:

- when the jobset is first created
- when the jobset is restarted after a failure (with restart or recreate all failure policy)
- when the jobset is resumed after suspension

In cases 1 and 2, the operator controls the order of creating the jobs, and so it creates the replicatedJob only when its turn comes in the startup sequence.

In case 3, the operator controls the order of unsuspending the jobs, and so it unsuspends the replicatedJob only when its turn comes in the startup sequence.

> On recreation or created, we will apply the startup policy before creating the jobs in a replicated job.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On initial creation or recreation, we will apply the startup policy before creating the jobs in a replicated job.
```

Author: addressed.

  - Projects like argo-workflows are a better use case for this.
<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a parallel framework user, I have one ReplicatedJob that functions as the driver and a series of worker ReplicatedJobs.  I want the driver to be ready before I start the worker replicated jobs.

```yaml
apiVersion: jobset.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: JobSet
metadata:
  name: driver-ready-worker-start
spec:

>   startupPolicy:

Reviewer 3: Hmm it feels awkward to have a startupPolicy at the jobSet level that defines a target replicated job to wait for a certain status, before starting x/y/z replicated job(s)... the semantics are unclear, does it apply to all replicatedJobs which are not the target of the policy? It also doesn't seem to have a way to have certain replicated jobs wait on a certain replicated job, but not others. This flexibility might be nice for future use cases. 

What do you think?

Author: I was going to push thoughts on this.  

If StartupPolicy is specified, I would suspend all jobs.  And then unsuspend the ones that match the target.  And keep doing that as they are listed.

Author: Part of the issue with partial application is that I think the API gets pretty complicated as we operator on ReplicatedJobs rather than Jobs.  So we can have partially completiion of the replicatedJobs with this API.  

I think it would be nice to have a partial readiness at the job level but I tried to bring that up to #wg-batch but I think there was some light pushback as we could utilize the `ready` condition at the Job level.  

I notice that `ReplicatedJobStatus` gives you the overal status of the ReplicatedJob though.  I wasn't sure if this is a big enough change to fix that or not.  

I figured we can tackle a lot of the usecases specified in Stories without having to change ReplicatedJobStatus too much.

Reviewer 4: I do think if it's at this level we would want to be able to target specific jobs. Arguably if a ReplicatedJob in a JobSet isn't linked to the other ones in a meaningful way, why would it need to be in the Jobset? 

It would make things simpler if at least the readiness was at the level of the Job. There are likely other use cases for that beyond Jobset.

Author: @ahg-g and @danielvegamyhre called that out originally in the original jobset doc.  I created https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/117758 for that reason.  

But there wasn't a large drive for that.  I think if we want something at the level of the job, we should bring that up as a use case for the job object.  

Right now, I went ahead with status ready field of Jobs.  This counts the number of pods that are ready and bubbles that information up to the job status.

easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

## Motivation

High Performance Computing / Machine Learning users usually want some control over how jobs are being created.  A Startup policy would allow a user to specify which status a replicated job should have before starting other replicated jobs in a jobset.

### Goals

- Add a startup policy for JobSet

### Non-Goals

- Complicated workflow specifications
  - This means that we will support simple dependecies rather than processing a full dag.
  - Projects like argo-workflows are a better use case for this.
- Starting Jobs based on Ready will be at the ReplicatedJob level not at the Job level.
  - ReplicatedJobs will be classified as ready if all jobs are ready.

## Proposal

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

As a user, I have one ReplicatedJob that functions as the driver and a series of worker ReplicatedJobs.  
I want the driver to be ready before I start the worker replicated jobs.  

> This is useful for HPC/AI/ML workloads as some frameworks have a driver pod that must be ready before the workers are started.  

Reviewer 2: what happens to the second job if the first job gets recreated after all of them became ready?

Author: Good point.  I guess with this API I am not sure.  If the driver gets killed or preempted, I think the downstream objects should be stopped.

Reviewer 4: If the launcher is essential to everything else, I would have it's (single pod) completion result in a failure in this case. So, no restarts and recreates unless the application stores state separately and is flexible to that.

Author: In my implementation PR, I had startup policy to be immutable so yes.

I'm not sure its worth the complication to allow for updates of the field.

Reviewer 2: lets clearly state that then.

Author: I did have a section on validating saying that startupPolicy is immutable.

Reviewer 2: It is not about mutability of the field, more about what we do across restarts, and here we are saying nothing.

We also need to clarify what we want to do across suspends, do we enforce the restart policy after resuming a suspended jobset?

> This is useful for HPC/AI/ML workloads as someone frameworks have a driver pod that must be ready before the workers are started.  

Author: ```suggestion
This is useful for HPC/AI/ML workloads as some frameworks have a driver pod that must be ready before the workers are started.  
```

The API below would fit my purpose.

```yaml
apiVersion: jobset.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: JobSet
metadata:
  name: driver-ready-worker-start
spec:
  startupPolicy:
  - name: driver
    status: Ready
  replicatedJobs:
  - name: driver
    replicas: 1
    template:
      spec:
        # Set backoff limit to 0 so job will immediately fail if any pod fails.
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 1
        parallelism: 1
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: driver
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10000
  - name: workers
    replicas: 1
    template:
      spec:
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 2
        parallelism: 2
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: worker
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
```

#### Story 2

> As a user, I have one ReplicatedJob that I want to finish before going on to the next worker.

Reviewer 2: I think we need to be careful about turning jobset into a workflow manager. Workflow managers are much more than simple sequencing, and I am concerned that we will be offering a half-baked solution with this approach.

Author: Agreed.  I already had some comments in this KEP/issue about this.  I was thinking that this could be fine as we only support sequential and no dag syntax.  

Similar to init containers (start in order).  It gets complicated because if you specify 1 or 2 jobs, what do you do with the others?

Not sure hence why I thought a KEP would be useful at first.

This can be useful as a simple way to target jobs to run in order.

An API that fits my purpose is below.

```yaml
apiVersion: jobset.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: JobSet
metadata:
  name: driver-ready-worker-start
spec:
  startupPolicy:

>   - name: driver

Reviewer 3: I think the name of this should be `first` to match the replicatedJob below

Author: updated.

>   - name: first

Author: ```suggestion
  - name: driver
```

    status: Succeeded
  replicatedJobs:
  - name: first
    replicas: 1
    template:
      spec:
        # Set backoff limit to 0 so job will immediately fail if any pod fails.
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 1
        parallelism: 1
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: driver
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 100

>   - name: second

Author: ```suggestion
  - name: worker
```

    replicas: 2
    template:
      spec:
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 2
        parallelism: 2
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: worker
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
```

#### Story 3

> As a user I only need a percentage of my targeted replicated job to succeed before going on to the next job.

Reviewer 3: Interesting idea, what is the use case for this though? What applications/frameworks require a percentage threshold like this?

Reviewer 2: +1, what is the use case?

Author: I'm not sure anymore.  

I was thinking of https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/117758 and [Success/Failure Policy](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/117600) in the job controller.  

In this case, you could have certain jobs be considered successful or failed based on percentage of indexes that passed/failed.  I thought maybe it could be a good idea to expand that to JobSet where you have certain percentage of replicatedJobs match a targerted status.  

I was thinking that if you had a bunch of replicas of the same ReplicatedJob, then wouldn't you also want to make sure that they all succeed.  But then it could be possible for some of them to fail and others to pass.  

I had a little too much on my last days in my last company so I was feeling inspired.  

Maybe this is YAGNI and we move this to a non goal?

Reviewer 4: +1 YAGNI.

An API that fits my purpose is below.  

```yaml
apiVersion: jobset.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: JobSet
metadata:
  name: driver-ready-worker-start
spec:
  startupPolicy:

>   - name: first

Author: ```suggestion
  - name: driver
```

    status: Succeeded
    numberOfStatuses: 5
  replicatedJobs:
  - name: first
    replicas: 10
    template:
      spec:
        # Set backoff limit to 0 so job will immediately fail if any pod fails.
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 1
        parallelism: 1
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: driver
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 100

>   - name: second

Author: ```suggestion
  - name: worker
```

    replicas: 1
    template:
      spec:
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 2
        parallelism: 2
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: worker
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
```

#### Story 4

> As a user I want to run the jobs in listed order.  Job A -> Job B -> Job C

Reviewer 2: Similar to the point above about workflows

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

### API Proposal

```golang
// Status of ReplicatedJob for StartupPolicy
type Status string

const (
 // Ready means that the job is ready
 Ready Status = "Ready"

 // Succeeded means that the job is successful
 Succeeded Status = "Succeeded"
)

type StartupPolicy struct {
 // TargetReplicatedJobStatuses is a list of rules for applying StartupPolicy.
 // +optional
 // +listType=map
 // +listMapKey=name
 TargetReplicatedJobStatuses []TargetReplicatedJobStartup `json:"targetReplicatedJobStatuses,omitempty"`
}

type TargetReplicatedJobStartup struct {
 // Name of ReplicatedJob to apply startup policy
 Name string `json:"name"`

 // The status you want the ReplicatedJob to be
 // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Ready;Succeeded
 Status Status `json:"status"`

 // Number of Statuses is how many ReplicatedJob statuses to consider "started"

>  // Empty will mean all status must match the replicas.

Reviewer 2: The name is confusing, it is not clear to me what "number of statuses" means? statuses isn't something we usually count

Author: Yea I originally thought we could consider the Job to report the ready status (and use a percentage of Jobs) to decide when a job was ready.  That wasn't accepted in upstream so I decided to try out this idea.

Author: Updated this.

This is useful for HPC/AI/ML workloads as someone frameworks have a driver pod that must be ready before the workers are started.  

The API below would fit my purpose.

```yaml
apiVersion: jobset.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: JobSet
metadata:
  name: driver-ready-worker-start
spec:
  startupPolicy:
  - name: driver
    status: Ready
  replicatedJobs:
  - name: driver
    replicas: 1
    template:
      spec:
        # Set backoff limit to 0 so job will immediately fail if any pod fails.
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 1
        parallelism: 1
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: driver
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10000
  - name: workers
    replicas: 1
    template:
      spec:
        backoffLimit: 0 
        completions: 2
        parallelism: 2
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: worker
              image: bash:latest
              command:
              - bash
              - -xc
              - |
                sleep 10
```

#### Story 2

> As an user, I have one ReplicatedJob that I want to finish before going on to the next worker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a user, I have one ReplicatedJob that I want to finish before going on to the next worker.
```

Author: TIL that this is the one exception to An with vowels!

}

type TargetReplicatedJobStartup struct {
 // Name of ReplicatedJob to apply startup policy
 Name string `json:"name"`

 // The status you want the ReplicatedJob to be
 // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Ready;Succeeded
 Status Status `json:"status"`

 // Number of Statuses is how many ReplicatedJob statuses to consider "started"
 // Empty will mean all status must match the replicas.
 NumberOfStatuses int32 `json:"numberOfStatuses,omitempty"`
}
```

Keeping the non specified jobs halted we propose to use suspend for these jobs.

So we will add a new field to the ReplicatedJobStatus.

```golang
// ReplicatedJobStatus defines the observed ReplicatedJobs Readiness.
type ReplicatedJobStatus struct {
  ...
	Suspended int32  `json:"suspended"`
}
```

### Implementation

If StartupPolicy is set and suspend field is off, we will start all jobs in a suspended state.  We will not set a condition for JobSet as suspended.

To track which ReplicatedJobs are suspended, we will add a `Suspended` field to the ReplicatedJobStatus.  This field will track the number of replicas that are suspended.

> When a JobSet is started with `StartupPolicy` specified, we will create jobs in a suspended state (ie `Job.Spec.Suspend = true`)  This avoids starting the underlying jobs.

Reviewer 3: Correct me if I am wrong but I think this saying the same thing as the first sentence in the implementation section?

Author: you are correct. updated

If StartupPolicy is set, then we will suspend the other jobs until the StartupPolicy is considered succesful.

> We will unsuspend only the jobs that match `TargetReplicatedJobStartup`.  Once they are considered "started" by matching on targeted status, then we resume all the rest of the jobs. 

Author: > Or is this saying that we handle only 1 startup policy at a time, in the order in which they are specified in the spec (e.g. we first see a startup policy for Job A so we unsuspend it, wait for Job A to complete, then we check the next startup policy and it's for Job B, so we unsuspend that, etc.)?

This is where I find it difficult balancing design versus implementation details.  

In the implementation, I apply StartupPolicy in sequential order.  

I would verify if JobA is suspended and then unsuspend.  I would return and trigger a reconcile.  

I loop over the startupPolicy rules and check if JobA is successful via the rules (Ready/Succeeded) and if it is, I move on to JobB and resume if its suspended.  

And repeat.  

If all the startup polices items are successful then we unsuspend everything not in the startup list (because the startup ones are running or succeeded).

> We will unsuspend only the jobs that match `TargetReplicatedJobStartup`.  Once they are considered "started" by matching on targeted status, then we resume all the rest of the jobs. 

Author: updated with this info. PTAL
